use-case: add ProcessCredentials object and track credentials changes at kernel (#888)
cilium/tetragon: docs/content/en/docs/use-cases/linux-process-credentials/monitor-changes-at-kernel.md

---
title: "Monitor Process Credentials changes at the Kernel layer"
weight: 2
icon: "reference"
description: "Monitor Process Credentials changes at the kernel layer"
---

Monitoring Process Credentials changes at the kernel layer is also possible.
This allows to capture the new [`process_credentials`]({{< ref "/docs/reference/grpc-api#processcredentials" >}}) that should be applied.

> This answers the questions:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This policy can be used to answer the following questions:
```

> > Which process or container is trying to change its own UIDs/GIDs in my cluster?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Which process or container is trying to change its own UIDs/GIDs in the cluster?
```

> > Which process or container is trying to change its own capabilities in my cluster?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Which process or container is trying to change its own capabilities in the cluster?
```

> In which [user namespace](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man7/user_namespaces.7.html) the credentials are being changed?

> I want to monitor the current/old [`process_credentials`]({{< ref "/docs/reference/grpc-api#processcredentials" >}}) and the new [`process_credentials`]({{< ref "/docs/reference/grpc-api#processcredentials" >}}) that could be applied.

> 

Reviewer: This is not a question, which seems confusing I think.

> ## Advantages of kernel layer monitoring

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Advantages and disadvantages of kernel layer monitoring compared to the system call layer
```

> The main advantage of monitoring at the kernel layer compared to the [system call layer](/docs/use-cases/linux-process-credentials/syscalls-monitoring):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The main advantages of monitoring at the kernel layer compared to the [system call layer](/docs/use-cases/linux-process-credentials/syscalls-monitoring) are:
```

* Ability to display the full new credentials to be applied.

* It is more reliable since it has full context on where and how the new credentials should be applied including the user namespace.

* It is a catch all layer for all system calls, and every kernel path that manipulate credentials.

* It is not vulnerable to user space arguments tampering.

> ## Disadvantage of Credentials monitoring at the kernel layer

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> It may generate lot of events. Filtering and matching must be applied to reduce the noise.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One potential disadvantage is that this approach may generate a lot of events, so appropriate filtering must be applied to reduce the noise.
```

## Kubernetes Environments

> Before going forward, verify that your k8s environment is all setup and that all pods are up and running, ensure you deploy our Demo Application to explore the Security Observability Events:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, verify that your k8s environment is all setup and that all pods are up and running, and  deploy the Demo Application:
```

> ```bash

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```{code-block} shell-session
```

kubectl create -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/cilium/cilium/v1.11/examples/minikube/http-sw-app.yaml
```

> It might take several seconds for some pods until they satisfy all the dependencies:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It might take several seconds until all pods are Running:
```

> ```bash

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```{code-block} shell-session
```

default              deathstar-54bb8475cc-zmfkr                   1/1     Running   0          2m54s
default              tiefighter                                   1/1     Running   0          2m54s
default              xwing                                        1/1     Running   0          2m54s
kube-system          tetragon-sdwv6                               2/2     Running   0          27m
```

### Monitor Process Credentials installation

We use the [process-creds-installed](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/cilium/tetragon/main/examples/tracingpolicy/process-credentials/process-creds-installed.yaml) Tracing Policy that hooks the kernel layer when credentials are being installed.

So let's apply the [process-creds-installed](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/cilium/tetragon/main/examples/tracingpolicy/process-credentials/process-creds-installed.yaml) Tracing Policy.

```bash
kubectl apply -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/cilium/tetragon/main/examples/tracingpolicy/process-credentials/process-creds-installed.yaml

```

Then we start monitoring for events with `tetra` cli:

> ```bash

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```{code-block} shell-session
```

kubectl exec -it -n kube-system ds/tetragon -c tetragon -- tetra getevents
```

In another terminal, inside a pod and as a non root user we will execute a setuid binary (suid):

> ```bash

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```{code-block} shell-session
```

            "gid": 0,
            "ns": {
              "inum": 4026531837,
              "is_host": true
            }
          }
        }
      }
    ],
    "action": "KPROBE_ACTION_POST"
  },
  "node_name": "kind-control-plane",
  "time": "2023-07-25T12:05:01.410834172Z"
}
```

In addition to the Kubernetes Identity and process metadata from exec events, [ProcessKprobe]({{< ref "/docs/reference/grpc-api#processkprobe" >}}) events contain the arguments of the observed system call. In the above case they are:

- `function_name`: the kernel `commit_creds()` function to install new credentials.
- `process_credentials_arg`: the new [`process_credentials`]({{< ref "/docs/reference/grpc-api#processcredentials" >}}) to be installed
   on the current process. It includes the UIDs/GIDs, the capabilities and the target user namespace.

Here we can clearly see that the suid binary is being executed by a user ID `11` in order to elevate its privileges to user ID `0` including capabilities.

To disable the [process-creds-installed Tracing Policy](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/cilium/tetragon/main/examples/tracingpolicy/process-credentials/process-creds-installed.yaml) run:

> ```bash

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```{code-block} shell-session
```
